Top Infrastructure as Code Tools Page (#13081)
pulumi/docs: content/what-is/top-iac-tools.md

We'll assess each tool based on the following criteria:

| Criteria    | Description                                                                 |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Flexibility | Ability to abstract and create reusable components                          |
| Multi-cloud  | Capability to manage resources across various cloud providers               |
| State       | How the tool handles state tracking and management                          |
| Integration | Compatibility with existing development workflows, CI/CD pipelines, and cloud-native technologies, including Kubernetes                          |
| Ecosystem   | Community strength, documentation quality, and support resources            |

## Multi-Cloud Infrastructure as Code Tools

First up, IaC tools that manage infrastructure across multiple cloud providers.

Multi-cloud solutions prevent vendor lock-in, maintain flexibility, and promote skill portability across different cloud environments. You should choose one of these tools if you are starting fresh with IaC and don't have migration costs associated with investment in a legacy tool.

> ### [Pulumi](https://www.pulumi.com/)

Author: Good idea. Done

We'll assess each tool based on the following criteria:

| Criteria    | Description                                                                 |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Flexibility | Ability to abstract and create reusable components                          |
| Multi-cloud  | Capability to manage resources across various cloud providers               |
| State       | How the tool handles state tracking and management                          |
| Integration | Compatibility with existing development workflows and CI/CD pipelines       |
| Ecosystem   | Community strength, documentation quality, and support resources            |

We'll cover modern multi-cloud tools, vendor and cloud-specific solutions, and some less common options.

## Multi-Cloud Infrastructure as Code Tools

First up, IaC tools that manage infrastructure across multiple cloud providers. You should pick one of these if you don't have any unusual requirements or legacy investments.

### Pulumi

> This is the Pulumi website, so it's not an unbiased source of information. Still, Pulumi stands out as a versatile Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool, offering the flexibility to manage infrastructure using a variety of programming languages.

Author: I like lamp-shading the fact that we are Pulumi. 

I assume if you end up on this page via a search, biggest thought is how could I possibly trust this, and so be up front about that.

> This is the Pulumi website, so it's not an unbiased source of information. Still, Pulumi stands out as a versatile Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool, offering the flexibility to manage infrastructure using a variety of programming languages.

Reviewer: I agree w/ @toriancrane that this feels unnecessary to say. While I agree with the motivation, I think if we have already softened the impact by describing our evaluation criteria in a way that feels largely unbiased, and includes factors where we are weaker than competitors (e.g. ecosystem).

It makes sense to me though, for the same purpose, to lead with TF not Pulumi, because at this point they are the market leader by a vast margin. 

Generally speaking, I do agree that it's important to call out our bias explicitly in places where it may not be as as clearly from Pulumi as our `pulumi.com` product website... e.g. in Reddit comments, GitHub, syndicated/partner articles, etc.

> This is the Pulumi website, so it's not an unbiased source of information. Still, Pulumi stands out as a versatile Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool, offering the flexibility to manage infrastructure using a variety of programming languages.

Author: Changed!

This flexibility allows developers to define infrastructure with real programming constructs, such as loops and functions, simplifying handling complex logic. Pulumi excels in multi-cloud support, integrating with major cloud providers such as AWS, Azure, Google Cloud, and many others.

Pulumi's state management is easy to use, automatically handling infrastructure state and storing it in the Pulumi Service by default. This approach simplifies collaboration and reduces the risk of state corruption, with built-in state locking and encryption ensuring secure and consistent state management. For those who prefer more control, Pulumi also supports self-managed backends.

> Pulumi integrates with existing development workflows, allowing developers to use familiar tools and practices. Pulumi's ecosystem is growing rapidly, with many resources and integrations available. Comprehensive documentation and support, including tutorials and an active community forum, further bolster its appeal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pulumi also integrates with existing development workflows, allowing developers to use familiar tools and practices. Pulumi's ecosystem is growing rapidly, with many resources and integrations available. Comprehensive documentation and support, including tutorials and an active community forum, further bolster its appeal.
```

"allowing developers to use familiar tools and practices" can you include some examples of familiar tools and practices? It also might be a good idea to list and link to some of the integrations.

> - **Flexibility**: Define infrastructure using your preferred programming language, which can simplify complex logic handling compared to HCL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Flexibility**: Define infrastructure using your preferred programming language, which can simplify complex logic handling compared to some other IaC tools.
```

> - **Multi-cloud**: Offers support for AWS, Azure, GCP, Oracle cloud and many others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Multi-cloud**: Offers support for AWS, Azure, Google Cloud, Oracle cloud and many others.
```

> - **State**: Automatically manages infrastructure state, storing it in the Pulumi Service with built-in state locking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **State**: Automatically manages infrastructure state, storing it in the Pulumi Cloud with built-in state locking and encryption.
```

- **Integration**: Integrates with existing development workflows, enhancing productivity and collaboration.
- **Ecosystem**: Growing community and ecosystem. Comprehensive documentation and support, including tutorials and an active community.

### Terraform

Terraform is a multi-cloud Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that utilizes the HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL). HCL is designed to be both human-readable and machine-friendly, striking a balance between simplicity and power. While it lacks some of the advanced programming constructs of general-purpose languages, HCL offers a declarative approach that many find intuitive for infrastructure definition. HCL lacks full programming constructs, which may necessitate workarounds for handling complex logic.

For state management, Terraform uses a state file to track the current state of your infrastructure. While this approach requires manual configuration, including setting up remote backends and state locking, it does offer fine-grained control over state.

> Terraform integrates well with existing development workflows and CI/CD pipelines, although additional scripting may be needed for complex scenarios. Terraform also has a wide range of plugins, integrations, and comprehensive documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Terraform integrates well with existing development workflows and CI/CD pipelines, although additional scripting may be needed for more complex scenarios. Terraform also has a wide range of plugins, integrations, and comprehensive documentation.
```

Can you provide an example of a more complex scenario that would require additional scripting?

- **Flexibility**: Utilizes HCL. Lacks full programming constructs.
- **Multi-cloud**: Offers support for AWS, Azure, GCP, Oracle cloud and many others.

> - **State**: Requires manual configuration for state management, including remote backends and state locking, which can add complexity to collaboration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **State**: Provides fine-grained control over state management, but requires manual configuration including remote backends and state locking, which can add complexity to collaboration.
```

For a more detailed comparison between OpenTofu and other IaC tools, including Terraform and Pulumi, please refer to our in-depth article: [Terraform vs.OpenTofu](/docs/iac/concepts/vs/terraform/opentofu/).

- **Flexibility**: Utilizes HCL, offering similar capabilities to Terraform in terms of infrastructure definition.
- **Multi-cloud**: Supports multiple cloud providers, mirroring Terraform's broad compatibility.
- **State**: Employs a state file system similar to Terraform for tracking infrastructure.
- **Integration**: Compatible with existing Terraform workflows and integrations.
- **Ecosystem**: Building its community and ecosystem, leveraging its Terraform roots.

## Cloud-Specific IaC Tools

While multi-cloud tools offer flexibility and prevent vendor lock-in, many organizations still opt for cloud-specific IaC tools.

Cloud-specific tools can offer:

1. Potentially tighter integration with native services
2. Potentially simpler setup for teams already familiar with a particular cloud ecosystem
3. Access to platform-specific features that might not be available in multi-cloud tools

> However, it's important to note that multi-cloud solutions offer more strategic advantages. They prevent vendor lock-in, maintain flexibility, and promote skill portability across different cloud environments. Despite these benefits of multi-cloud tools, understanding cloud-specific options is crucial for a comprehensive view of the IaC tooling landscape.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think the benefits of multi-cloud solutions should be in the multi-cloud section and this description should be removed from here.

Reviewer 2: I also noted that the **state** criteria was not included in this section. Was that intentional? I think it should be included if state management is only managed by the provider and not possible to do manually.

Author: I left out state, because all three tools ended up being identical "state is managed by the cloud provider" but I can add something specifically calling that out.

### AWS CloudFormation

AWS CloudFormation supports JSON or YAML. Like Pulumi and Terraform, it has a declarative, desired state approach.

CloudFormation is supported by extensive documentation. However, managing complex templates can be challenging, and there is a steep learning curve associated with CloudFormation's syntax and AWS services. Performance issues may arise with large deployments, but rollback triggers can revert to a previous state if a deployment fails.

CloudFormation supports cross-account and cross-region deployments. Despite these strengths, CloudFormation has limitations. Template size limitations and cryptic error messages complicating error handling are among the most common online complaints. Managing dependencies between resources can become complex past a certain scale, and testing capabilities for templates are limited.

- **Flexibility**: Some support for abstraction and modularity through nested stacks and reusable templates.
- **Integration**: Integrates well with AWS-native CI/CD. Broader integration to non-AWS environments is possible but more challenging.

> - **Ecosystem**: Supported by documentation, providing resources for learning and troubleshooting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Ecosystem**: Supported by extensive documentation, providing resources for learning and troubleshooting.
```

Reviewer 2: I also think we should include and evaluate AWS CDK to help draw a stark difference between what Pulumi provides in comparison because the CDK is more similar to Pulumi.

### Azure Resource Manager

> Azure Resource Manager (ARM) supports JSON-based configuration or using Bicep - a ARM-specific DSL. JSON-based templating is also possible. ARM integrates deeply with Azure services including Azure DevOps, however, integration with non-Azure workflows can be more challenging. The ecosystem is supported by a large community and extensive documentation. The complexity of managing dependencies between resources with ARM can increase with scale. Potential performance issues with large deployments have been a challenge with ARM. However, Azure Resource Manager is preferred by those who want a native Azure tool and are deeply invested in the Azure ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Azure Resource Manager (ARM) supports JSON-based configuration or using Bicep - a ARM-specific DSL. JSON-based templating is also possible. ARM integrates deeply with Azure services including Azure DevOps. However, integration with non-Azure workflows can be more challenging. The ecosystem is supported by a large community and extensive documentation. The complexity of managing dependencies between resources with ARM can increase with scale. Potential performance issues with large deployments have been a challenge with ARM. However, Azure Resource Manager is preferred by those who want a native Azure tool and are deeply invested in the Azure ecosystem.
```

"JSON-based templating is also possible." Is this a redundant sentence?

" integration with non-Azure workflows can be more challenging." Can you provide more details on how?

"The complexity of managing dependencies between resources with ARM can increase with scale." Can you explain how this is the can in comparison to Pulumi?

"Potential performance issues with large deployments have been a challenge with ARM." I think this could benefit from more details as well.

- **Flexibility**: Uses JSON-based templates or Bicep - a DSL. Lacks some of the abstraction and modularity of other tools.

> - **Integration**: Integrates well with Azure services. Broader integration to non-Azure CI/CD is more challenging.

Reviewer 2: Is it only non-Azure CI/CD or is it other tools as well?

- **Ecosystem**: Supported by documentation, tutorials and troubleshooting advice and by the greater Azure ecosystem.

### Google Cloud Deployment Manager

> Google Cloud Deployment Manager (CDM) focuses on managing Google Cloud Platform (GCP) resources using YAML and Python Jinja2 templates. CDM integrates deeply with Google Cloud and, like other native cloud tools, manages state internally. CDM offers resource grouping for enhanced resource management and cost management tools for expense tracking.

Reviewer 2: What is resource grouping and why is it important?

> While Google Cloud Deployment Manager's deep GCP integration is a strength, it faces challenges, including intricate template management and steep learning curves. Like other provider-specific solutions, CDM is ideal for teams with a strong focus on and investment in the Google Cloud ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Google Cloud Deployment Manager's deep Google Cloud integration is a strength, it does face certain challenges such as intricate template management and steep learning curves. Like other provider-specific solutions, CDM is ideal for teams with a strong focus on and investment in the Google Cloud ecosystem.
```

- **Flexibility**: YAML or Jinja2 templating.

> - **Integration**: Integrates deeply with Google Cloud Platform (GCP) services. Additional features for integration with CI/CD pipelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Integration**: Integrates deeply with Google Cloud services. Additional features for integration with CI/CD pipelines.
```

- **Ecosystem**: Supported by documentation and a smaller GCP-focused community.

## Conclusion

> Choosing the right Infrastructure as Code tool is crucial in today's complex cloud landscape. We've explored options ranging from multi-cloud solutions to cloud-specific tools, each with unique strengths. The ideal choice depends on your needs, considering flexibility, multi-cloud support, state management, workflow integration, and ecosystem robustness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Choosing the right Infrastructure as Code tool is crucial in today's complex cloud landscape. We've explored options ranging from multi-cloud solutions to cloud-specific tools, each with unique strengths and weaknesses. The ideal choice depends on your needs, considering flexibility, multi-cloud support, state management, workflow integration, and ecosystem robustness.
```

Each tool offers unique strengths and potential trade-offs:

> 1. Multi-cloud tools like Pulumi, Terraform, and OpenTofu provide flexibility across cloud providers.

Reviewer 2: I think , in addition to the strengths, it would be good to mention some of the high level tradeoffs here and for the cloud specific options for #2.

2. Cloud-specific tools like AWS CloudFormation, Azure Resource Manager, and Google Cloud Deployment Manager offer deep integration with their respective platforms.

> We've shown you the options – now let us make our case for Pulumi. Pulumi's use of general-purpose programming languages for infrastructure definition provides familiar syntax, powerful abstractions, and seamless integration with existing development workflows. It's really something you need to experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The case should have been made in the Pulumi section in my opinion.

Author: I like having the more clearly biased part at the end, where sections are more rubric based, but might just be my own taste.

> But regardless of the tool you choose, embracing Infrastructure as Code is a crucial step towards more efficient, consistent, and scalable cloud management. The right IaC tool can transform your approach to infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regardless of the tool you choose, embracing Infrastructure as Code is a crucial step towards more efficient, consistent, and scalable cloud management. The right IaC tool can transform your approach to infrastructure.
```

I also think this would be a good place to add a call to action to check out Pulumi IaC and link to a Get Started for each of the main cloud providers.

Author: 👍  I linked each sections headings to the each tool.
